Reading time

Updated

First published

Cats are territorial animals, meaning they may fight with each other over certain spaces. Male cats that haven't been neutered are particularly territorial, so neutering can help lower the chances of them getting into fights, but there is still a possibility, which could result in injuries like cat bites, scratches and abscesses.

Cats have bacteria in their mouths and claws which can be injected into another cat’s skin through biting or scratching during a fight, causing infection under the skin. Commonly affected areas are the tail, face, head, neck and legs.

An abscess (a swelling filled with pus) can take 2-3 days to develop. Before this is visible, you may notice the following signs with your cat:

Limping, if bitten on one of the legs

Lethargy/tiredness

Reduced appetite

High temperature/fever

The affected area may be hot to the touch and painful

If an abscess develops, you may notice:

Swelling

Redness

If it bursts, you will see pus and may notice a bad smell

Abscesses are usually very painful, so your cat may be reluctant to be touched.

Cat bites leading to potential abscesses are caused by cats fighting, often over territory. The abscess develops from infection building up under the skin, as bite and scratch wounds often heal over very quickly, trapping the infection.

If you see what you think is a bite wound on your cat, bathe it with salt water (one teaspoon to around 500 mLs of boiled, but cool, water) if your cat will allow, and contact your veterinary team.

Your vet will make a diagnosis based on your cat’s history of fighting, the signs they’re showing, and from examining your cat and any potential wounds. If your cat has a swelling, they may take a sample with a needle to check for pus before starting treatment.

Your vet may lance the abscess (make a small incision in it to release the pus), drain it and flush it out until clean. If your cat appears to be in pain, they may also prescribe anti-inflammatories to make your cat more comfortable. Antibiotics are not always needed, as removing the pus can result in the abscess healing well.

Your vet will advise on how to look after the abscess wound after it has been treated, which may include cleaning it regularly using a salt water (saline) solution, if your cat allows this. The wound should heal within a few days – if it doesn’t, contact your veterinary team.

If your cat needs medication such as antibiotics or anti-inflammatories, you may find our article on how to give medication to your cat helpful.

If you have been bitten by a cat, you should immediately see a doctor who will clean the wound and may give you a course of antibiotics.
