Canine distemper is a highly contagious viral disease that can affect the whole body. It can cause fever, low white blood cell counts, eye and nose discharge, digestive signs, lung inflammation, and brain inflammation. It occurs worldwide and can affect dogs, ferrets, and various wild species.

Most dogs are infected by breathing in virus droplets from an infected animal. Some dogs can spread virus for months in their saliva and feces even after they appear to have recovered.

A short fever often appears 3–6 days after infection, sometimes with a low white blood cell count and mild appetite loss. After a brief improvement, an affected animal can have a second fever with eye or nose discharge, tiredness, and loss of appetite. Digestive and breathing problems often follow, and thickening of skin around the footpads (referred to as “hardpad”) and nose can occur.

Nervous system signs can occur at the same time as or after other signs, or sometimes alone. These can include:

- twitching of muscles, such as in the leg or face
- partial or complete paralysis (inability to move), often starting in the back legs and followed by weakness and paralysis in all four legs
- seizures, often with drooling and chewing motions of the jaw (called “chewing-gum fits”)

Additional signs include circling (walking in a circle instead of a straight line), head tilt, and uncontrolled rapid eye movements.

Long-term distemper infection can cause inflammation of the brain. This condition is often associated with poor coordination, behaviors like pressing the head against objects or constant pacing, and exaggerated muscle movements.

These signs can appear in adult dogs, even if they did not previously show signs of canine distemper. Nervous system signs usually worsen over time. Dogs with this form of the disease don't typically spread it to other dogs.

Diagnosis might require lab tests because signs can overlap with those caused by other types of infections.

Treatment is supportive, including antibiotics for bacteria along with injections of fluids, nutritional support, and medications to control fever, pain, and seizures.

Nervous system damage is difficult to treat and can be permanent. Euthanasia can be considered if disease is severe and worsening.

Vaccination is the best prevention. Your vet will recommend a vaccination schedule for your dog based on its health, how common the disease is in your area, and other risk factors.
