Assessment of the Neonatal Triad

During the neonatal period, puppies and kittens present immaturity in several organic systems, possessing unique characteristics that completely differ from those of adult animals. One of the main consequences of physiological immaturity is the greater risk of manifestation of the neonatal triad (hypothermia, hypoglycemia, and dehydration).

The neonatal triad is the most common clinical manifestation of any condition or change in the newborn. It is important to highlight that any neonatal disease can cause depression, apathy, a reduced sucking reflex, and a consequent reduction in milk intake, which can lead to the manifestation of this condition. Furthermore, the triad can occur due to management errors and maternal changes, such as agalactia, hypogalactia, or failure of maternal instinct. Assessment of the triad is essential at any neonatal appointment for puppies and kittens.

Hypothermia

Several physiological aspects are related to the predisposition of newborns to develop hypothermia, such as hypothalamic immaturity, reduced adipose tissue, poorly vasoconstriction mechanisms, inability of the tremor reflex in the first days of life, and a large surface/body mass ratio [1,2,37]. Therefore, newborns are considered ectothermic animals, requiring maternal or environmental heating to maintain a stable body temperature and active metabolism.

Moderate hypothermia can reduce metabolism, leading to lethargy, inappetence, and decreased neonatal reflexes. The newborn still tries to breastfeed, but the milk may not be properly digested due to reduced motility of the gastrointestinal tract (paralytic ileus), which can cause regurgitation, aspiration pneumonia, gas production, and gastrointestinal dilation [1,38]. For these reasons, hypothermic neonates should not be fed.

In severe hypothermia, neonatal clinical depression occurs, and newborns become extremely lethargic, interrupting attempts to breastfeed. There is a decrease in cardiorespiratory function (bradycardia and bradypnea), resulting in a risk of tissue hypoxia, acidosis, and death [38].

To diagnose hypothermia, the newborn’s temperature must be assessed rectally (using a digital thermometer) (Figure 5) or using an infrared thermometer (Figure 6), as previously described. The newborn’s ideal body temperature varies with age (Table 3).

Hypoglycemia

Some physiological characteristics make neonates particularly susceptible to hypoglycemia. Due to liver immaturity, puppies and kittens are born with limited glycogen reserves and minimal capacity for gluconeogenesis. In puppies and kittens that are not breastfeeding, blood glucose levels can decline quickly as the ability to maintain normoglycemia during fasting is reduced. Liver reserves are completely depleted within 24 h; however, a rapid decline in glycemia may occur before this period in fragile, sick, premature, or low-birth-weight neonates [1,39].

Hypoglycemic newborns may manifest crying, weakness, apathy, decreased or absent sucking reflex, and interruption of breastfeeding, worsening their condition. Severe hypoglycemia can lead to bradycardia, seizures, coma, and death. Bradycardia occurs due to reduced metabolism and glucose supply to the myocardium. As the treatment is carried out and the blood glucose increases, the heart rate increases concomitantly [39].

Blood glucose should be measured with a portable glucometer, using a 24 or 26-gauge needle to collect a blood sample from the newborn’s digital pad (Figure 8), from the inside of the ear, or by collecting blood from the jugular vein.

The glycemic reference value in puppies and neonatal kittens is still controversial. In dogs, an old study demonstrated that concentrations such as 40 mg/dL [40] shortly after birth were considered normal. A more recent study reported an average concentration of 66 mg/dL in the umbilical cord [41]. However, another recent study demonstrated that at birth, the glycemia of neonatal dogs is related to maternal glycemia (approximately 90%) [42], and this cannot be considered a standard of normality for the species. Another study demonstrated that a glucose concentration <92 mg/dL during the first 24 hours of life is correlated with a greater risk of death during the first 21 days of life [43], indicating that concentrations lower than these are not considered normal. For example, a study demonstrated that the average blood glucose levels in newborn puppies aged one, four, and seven days were 106, 114, and 129 mg/dL, respectively [12]. With respect to glycemia during the first four weeks of age, one study reported a mean glycemic level of 125 mg/dL (range 106–182 mg/dL) in 349 healthy neonatal dogs [44]. Thus, neonatal normoglycemia in dogs can be considered to be between 90 and 200 mg/dL [39]. A glucose concentration <90 mg/dL indicates hypoglycemia [39,43]. Neonatal hypoglycemia can be characterized as mild (<90 to 70 mg/dL), moderate (<70 mg/dL to 40 mg/dL), or severe (<40 mg/dL) [39].

In neonatal kittens, one study demonstrated that the mean blood glucose at birth (eutocic parturition) was 68 mg/dL (ranging from 26 to 151 mg/dL) [16], but possibly, in the same way as in puppies, glycemia at birth may be related to maternal glycemia. Authors suggest that a blood glucose concentration <50 mg/dL in kittens up to two weeks after birth is abnormal, especially when accompanied by clinical signs [37,45]. In the literature, a range of 75 to 154 mg/dL on the second day after birth is considered normal [45]. More studies are needed to evaluate the average blood glucose levels of kittens over time during the neonatal period.

Dehydration

Newborn puppies and kittens are more susceptible to dehydration than adult animals, mainly due to renal immaturity, with a lower water conservation capacity. The puppy neonatal kidney is functionally characterized by a low glomerular filtration rate, renal plasma flow, filtration fraction, depressed reabsorption of aminoacids and phosphate, and low concentrating ability [46,47,48]. In the literature, information concerning the renal physiology of neonatal kittens is lacking. Furthermore, other physiological characteristics, such as a higher concentration of body water, a large surface area/body mass ratio, and greater loss of fluids due to skin immaturity or a thin layer of keratin, increase the predisposition of newborns to dehydration [1,2]. Dehydrated puppies can progress to hypovolemia, hypotension, shock, and death.

It can be challenging to assess hydration status in canine and feline neonates. Due to the physiological immaturity of the skin, lower subcutaneous fat, and higher concentration of body water, skin turgor is not developed as in adults and is not a reliable assessment in neonates. The color of mucous membranes can be used to assess hydration; the dark red color is indicative of dehydration in newborns [49,50]. Neonatal dehydration can be assessed subjectively by the urine color, which in newborns is very diluted with no visible color [6,10,50]. Shades of yellow suggest dehydration; the darker the urine is, the more dehydrated the newborn is. A gentle manipulation of the genitalia with a damp cotton pad stimulates urination and evaluation of urine color (Figure 9). Furthermore, urinary density can be evaluated using a refractometer, where a value > 1.017 is considered an indication of dehydration. As the kidney is not able to concentrate urine effectively, the specific gravity of urine gives results when there is already possible severe dehydration [1,2,50].

Other subjective methods of assessing dehydration include laboratory parameters such as hematocrit and total protein. The hemoconcentration is an indication of dehydration. Hemograms must be evaluated according to the normal parameters of the neonatal period.

After evaluation of temperature, blood glucose, and hydration, a physical examination should proceed. However, if the neonate is diagnosed with a triad, it is essential first to stabilize the newborn and then continue the diagnostic investigation.

The Role of the Owner in Identifying Newborns at Risk

It is important to instruct the owner to constantly evaluate their litters and when to consult a veterinarian if any abnormalities are observed. They must be instructed to monitor weight gain, stimulate urination and defecation to observe the color and consistency of excreta, observe the behavior of the litter and the mother, whether the puppies are suckling, milk the breasts to observe production and the appearance of the milk, assess the neonatal temperature with a digital or infrared thermometer, observe the respiratory pattern, and observe the color of the oral region, abdomen, umbilical region, and limb extremities.

Litter daily monitoring can ensure early identification of clinical signs of changes or affections. Table 13 shows the main risk signs that owners can observe, and based on these findings, the litter and mother can be referred for a veterinary clinical appointment.
